We'd like to read today's text in its entirety from Matthew 1810,
see that you do not despise one of these little ones.
For I tell you that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my father who is in heaven.
Now, we would like to discuss two questions in connection with this text.
First of all, who are these little ones and how does Jesus identify them?
And second, how is Jehovah caring for the little ones of the earth today?
Well, first, who are the little ones mentioned in our text?
The book, Jesus the Way, connects Matthew 18 with the accounts in Mark and Luke.
And in the accounts in Mark and Luke, it explained that before the question that they asked Jesus,
they had been arguing about who was the greatest.
So then at Matthew 181, they asked Jesus directly,
who really is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?
Well, Jesus used this opportunity to teach them an unforgettable lesson.
He took a young child and stood it in their midst and said,
unless you turn around and become as young children, you will never enter the kingdom.
He used this child as an object lesson to adjust their thinking.
In verse 6, he speaks about these little ones who have faith in me.
And in verse 10, he said, do not despise these little ones.
The 2015 watchtower said that they are those who may seem unimportant from the standpoint of the world.
Now, when Jesus said these things, he was probably pointing to that child who was still in their midst.
And that child represented all humble disciples who put faith in Jesus.
And one reference says to despise the little ones here is to treat them as of no real significance.
Now, immediately after telling the disciples not to despise the little ones,
Jesus gave the touching illustration of a shepherd who had a hundred sheep.
But he does not despise or view as insignificant even one of those sheep.
He searches everywhere for the lost sheep who has strayed from the flock or who hasn't joined the flock yet.
So that leads us to our second question, how is Jehovah caring for little ones of the earth today?
For a few minutes, let's think about how Jehovah has opened the way for little ones on the continent of Africa to become part of his flock.
Now, Africa is home to about one-third of the world's languages.
And we translate at least some Bible literature in over 350 African languages.
And part of the new world translation is now available in 90 of those languages.
Now, many of those indigenous languages are not taught in school.
In fact, the watchtower is often the only regular source of literature or reading material.
Now, many in Africa who speak the official languages like English, French, Portuguese, or Swahili
tend to view the local indigenous languages as somewhat inferior.
In fact, churches often limit their services to the official or the national languages.
But that's understandable because those who attend a church are usually just passive participants, maybe singing a song or two.
But due to educational and economic factors, many millions, and especially those in the rural areas and the villages,
don't know well the official languages, or they may not even know them at all.
But that does not stop Jehovah from finding his sheep who speak those languages.
He draws them to himself.
The governing body recently gave approval to produce the enjoy life forever book in the watchtower magazine in the Havu,
Kanyok and Kanande languages of Congo.
And listen to how it affects those who hear Jehovah's voice in their own language.
Now, Habakkuk is a Kanande speaking brother who first heard the truth in Swahili, one of the national languages of Congo.
But he struggled to make progress because he didn't know Swahili well.
He said, I grew up speaking Kanande.
But I thought it was a sin to speak Kanande at the Kingdom Hall.
When we started having meetings in Kanande, I realized that it was not a sin against Jehovah to speak it.
In our territory, people are used to speaking Kanande, and I now have six Bible studies.
I'm thankful to preaching Kanande because I find many people who are interested in learning the Bible.
A Kanyok sister named Kafia said, it was hard for me to progress to baptism in Chaluba, which is another national language of Congo.
It was not really my language.
But when I saw the listen to God brochure in Kanyok, even the title touched my heart.
I take pleasure in my personal study now.
I feel comfortable praying.
It feels like I'm talking to my father who is listening.
I progressed to baptism in 2022.
When preaching in Kanyok, I can see the interest of people in my neighborhood.
Often, I hear them say how they now see that God understands their language of Kanyok.
And then finally, Anita, an 18-year-old Havu speaking sister, said,
I started studying in 2020 in Swahili, and I made progress at the speed of a tortoise.
Upon seeing my Bible's teacher arriving, fear would overwhelm me because it was so hard for me to study in Swahili.
When I started studying the Bible and attending meetings in Havu, I was no longer scared.
I enjoyed my Bible study, gave comments at meetings, and recently I was baptized.
My relationship with Jehovah has become strong.
My prayers are deeper now because I tell Jehovah everything in my heart without fear of making mistakes like I did in Swahili.
I am comfortable preaching in Havu.
I no longer fear that people will laugh at me as was the case in Swahili.
So these are just a few examples, but the thousands of Bible studies being conducted in these and other native languages of Congo testify that Jehovah is giving attention to these little ones.
Now, in addition to these languages, we produce material for the deaf in 22 sign languages of Africa.
And one of the little ones who uses Zimbabwean sign language said,
do not forget to tell the brothers that when we see the work behind the conventions and the enjoy life forever book, this message comes through again and again.
Jehovah loves the deaf. Jehovah loves the deaf.
These few expressions illustrate why we conduct meetings and produce literature in so many languages of Africa as well as other parts of the earth.
It's evidence that Jehovah is caring for these little ones.
Now, in many of these local and sign language congregations, there are often just hundreds of publishers rather than many thousands.
Translation teams are often quite small, like these Havu and Kanyok teams.
And obviously they can't produce everything we receive in English, but they work hard because they realize how much their audience needs the basic material they translate in order to come to know Jehovah.
These translators are highly motivated, much like a sister who some years ago was interpreting nearly every talk to a very small deaf audience at an international convention.
Brother Milton Henshel noticed how hard she was working and he asked one of the brothers, what gives her the stamina?
The reply, one of the deaf sisters in the audience is her mother and she doesn't want her to miss anything of the program.
Well, our translators in Africa and worldwide feel the same about their audiences.
And we also keep in mind what Jesus said in part B of our text that their angels in heaven always look upon the face of my father who is in heaven.
And the study note on this verse has an interesting statement.
Jesus' statement about these little ones, namely his disciples and their angels does not necessarily mean that each devoted Christian has a special guardian angel assigned to him.
But angels are looking out for the spiritual welfare of true Christians as a whole and take an active interest in each of Christ's disciples.
So we're privileged to work along with these angels and the faithful slave who shared Jesus' view that's stated at the end of today's text comments.
It is not a desirable thing for my father who is in heaven for even one of these little ones to perish.